The internet was created in 1969 with the purpose to connect the universities around USA. It was called DARPA
As today, June 2026 there are ~6 billion people that use the internet and ~21 billion internet connected devices. 

What is internet? 
Internet is a network of networks. This creates a global infrastructure that allows information to travel, on demand, from one place to another.   

The internet has a basics model that it is called tcp/ip

The internet is made of:
end devices -> pc's, laptops, smartphones, IOT. This means that the end devices are the terminals where the information starts or it ends or both
servers -> this provides the internet experience as we know
intermediary devices -> routers, switches, ap, firewall. This are the devices that connects the end devices with the servers. 

Network categories

Main categories of network:
LAN - Local Area Network
WAN - Wide Area Network
WLAN - Wireless Local Area Network

Secondary categories of networks:
PAN - Personal Area Network - a connection between a phone and another end device.
MAN - Metropolitan Area Network - A company with more sites can extend the network to a larger layer like a city layer of networks 
SAN - Storage Area Network - a network with the purpose of storage 

Components of a Network:
End devices 
A transfer medium: electrical - copper wires, light - fiber optics, radio frequency - wireless 
Intermediary devices - switch, routers, firewall, AP - access point 


How end devices communicates. Ip addresses - Public and Private ones and MAC addresses

For devices to go trough internet they need an IP address
IP addresses are unique over the internet
Private IP addresses are:
192.168.0.0
172.16.0.0
10.0.0.0

MAC addresses
They are unique in LAN
Inside the LAN the communication is based on MAC address
The MAC address is embedded o the NIC - Network Interface Card
The format of the MAC address is hexadecimal 
MAC address - CE:3E:7E:62:AB:1F


How does a pc communicate trough internet

For a pc, or a device to communicate trough internet there are some things that needs to happen. 
The pc needs an ip address. 
The IP address is provided automatically by the DHCP. 
The IP addresses dimension is determined by MASK. 
There needs to be a gateway for the packages to go out trough internet. 
There also needs to be a DNS server that will translate the domain name into source IP address

pc 192.168.0.2/24 -> gateway 192.168.0.1 -> DNS server -> public ip 185.203.134.065 -> destination address google.com -> ip 142.251.14.100


Ports and Protocols

Ports are used to identify a network service at a operating system level. 

Generally speaking, for communication to take place there needs to be an source IP and a destination IP. 
but beside the source IP and destination IP there needs to be a source port and a destination port
Usually the Source port id randomly generated by an ap, or browser and the destination is a fixed port number. 
The ports are having values from 1 to 65535
From 1 to 1024 are the values of well known ports

Some of the well known ports:
WEB - http -80
      https -443
mail -25
DNS -53
MPT - 123
FTP -20/21
SSH - 22
DHCP - 67/68

How to check the things discussed so far. 
in cmd type ipconfig to see the config of adapters. 
or type ipconfig /all to see all the config for adapters(more info)
type ping google.ro to see the connectivity of your internet
type ping and your gateway to see the communication within your network
type tracert google.com to see the hops that the packages are going from source IP to destination IP



